MITH is pleased to announce that we are welcoming Amanda Visconti as the recipient of the 2014-15 [Winnemore Digital Humanities Dissertation Fellowship](http://mith.umd.edu/community/fellowships/winnemore-fellows/ "Winnemore Digital Humanities Dissertation Fellows Program") at MITH. Applications for the fellowship were given careful consideration based on the extent to which new media and digital technologies were an integral part of the research plan and/or the pedagogical methodology being developed.

Amanda is a doctoral candidate in the department of English at the University of Maryland, where her dissertation project ““[How Can You Love a Text, If You Don’t Know It?”: Critical Code and Design toward Participatory Digital Editions](http://dr.amandavisconti.com/),” has already attracted the attention of the digital humanities community and the media for its groundbreaking re-conceptualization of the dissertation as a digital product.

Amanda’s connection to MITH is already deep, starting in the summer of 2009 when she spent several months in residence under the auspices of a competitive IMLS-funded program that placed library and information science students as interns at digital humanities centers. Her Michigan thesis represented an early attempt to bridge the gap between information science and textual scholarship, focusing on issues of usability and access in the online William Blake Archive.

In her four years as a student at Maryland she has flourished, not only completing her doctoral exams with distinction (and with a field specialization in textual studies), but also working as a full-time graduate assistant at MITH. During her time here she collaborated frequently with faculty on digital projects (including most notably the BitCurator project and the Shelley-Godwin Archive), mentored other graduate students, received competitive admittance to an advanced seminar at the Folger Shakespeare Library as well as a 2012 fellowship from the Editing Modernism in Canada Project, and established herself as a rising star in the international digital humanities community through both conference participation and a regularly updated professional blog. Despite a wide and varied engagement with digital humanities, including gaming and electronic literature, Amanda’s interests have always been firmly grounded in textual scholarship and electronic editing.

Please join us in welcoming Amanda in her new role at MITH! To read more please visit [her staff page](http://mith.umd.edu/people/person/amanda-visconti/ "Amanda Visconti").