We are currently looking to hire three GA positions at MITH, with a wide variety of skill sets. Please read each of the three ads below carefully, and clearly indicate which position you're applying for. MGK

1\. The Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities (MITH) is seeking a full time (20 hour/week) graduate assistant to work as metadata specialist on a major IMLS grant involving the digitization of important primary source material from North and South America. Applications should have experience using XML and, ideally, TEI. The ideal candidate will also have knowledge of XSLT as well as PHP and JavaScript's XML processing functions. Please submit a CV and cover letter to Doug Reside ( dreside@umd.edu) by January 15.

2\. The Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities (MITH) is seeking a full time (20 hour/week) graduate assistant to work as a web designer on a major IMLS grant involving the digitization of important primary source material from North and South America. Applications should have experience designing attractive and functional dynamic, AJAX websites. The ideal candidate will also have significant experience with Adobe Flash. Applicants should submit a portfolio (links to online designs is fine) to Doug Reside ( dreside@umd.edu) by January 15.

3\. The Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities (MITH) is seeking a part time (10 hour/week) graduate assistant to work on a funded two-year grant project on Preserving Virtual Worlds, sponsored by the Library of Congress NDIIPP program. In collaboration with partners at Illinois, Stanford, and RIT we will seek to develop best practices and standards for preserving virtual worlds ranging from 1970s interactive fiction to today's Second Life. We're especially looking for students with an active interest in gaming and virtual worlds. Experience with XML, metadata, and encoding standards is also a plus. Please submit a CV and cover letter to Matthew Kirschenbaum (mgk@umd.edu) by January 15.