The [Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities](http://mith.umd.edu/) (MITH) at the University of Maryland seeks an Assistant Director for Innovation and Learning to play a leadership role in managing MITH’s growing portfolio of courses and instructional programs. The successful candidate will report to MITH’s Director and be adept at fostering the development of exciting digital humanities related curriculum and programs; creating dynamic learning communities for faculty, postdoctoral fellows, graduate students and undergraduates; and providing valuable input towards MITH’s strategic goals and plans. She or he will draw upon successful experience with training and curriculum development in the digital humanities, and demonstrate the ability to cultivate and manage constructive relationships with a variety of University partners and stakeholders.

Two years of relevant professional experience in a digital humanities center, lab, or similar organization is required, as is demonstrated experience with designing and implementing digital humanities education or training programs; experience leading workshops, tutorials, or classroom instruction; experience contributing to a digital humanities project or initiative; excellent verbal and written communication skills; and strong organizational and interpersonal skills. An M.A. or M.L.S. in a humanities discipline, library and information science, or a related field is required at minimum.

This position is full-time and salary is commensurate with experience. The University of Maryland also offers a competitive benefits package. To apply, please send a letter of application, CV, and contact information for three references to Neil Fraistat, Director of MITH, via email: [fraistat@umd.edu](mailto:fraistat@umd.edu). For best consideration, applications should be received by **Friday, April 22**. Confidential review of applications will continue until the position is filled. We particularly encourage applications from members of under-represented groups.

The University of Maryland, College Park, an equal opportunity/affirmative action employer, complies with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations regarding nondiscrimination and affirmative action; all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment. The University is committed to a policy of equal opportunity for all persons and does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental disability, protected veteran status, age, gender identity or expression, sexual orientation, creed, marital status, political affiliation, personal appearance, or on the basis of rights secured by the First Amendment, in all aspects of employment, educational programs and activities, and admissions.