---
author:
- 'MITH '
date: '2006-10-30T16:28:00.000Z'
layout: ../../layouts/PostLayout.astro
slug: electronic-literature-collection-volume-1-released
title: Electronic Literature Collection, Volume 1 Released
---

**College Park, Maryland, October 26, 2006** -- The Electronic Literature Organization today released the [Electronic Literature Collection, Volume One](http://collection.eliterature.org/). The _Collection_, edited by N. Katherine Hayles, Nick Montfort, Scott Rettberg, and Stephanie Strickland, is an anthology of 60 eclectic works of electronic literature, published simultaneously on CD-ROM and on the web at [collection.eliterature.org](http://collection.eliterature.org/). Another compelling aspect of the project is that it is being published by the Electronic Literature Organization under a Creative Commons License (Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 2.5), so readers are free to copy and share any of the works included, or for instance to install the collection on every computer in a school's computer lab, without paying any licensing fees. The Collection will be free for individuals.

The 60 works included in the _Electronic Literature Collection_ present a broad overview of the field of electronic literature, including selected works in new media forms such as hypertext fiction, kinetic poetry, generative and combinatory forms, network writing, codework, 3D, and narrative animations. Contributors include authors and artists from the USA, Canada, UK, France, Germany, and Australia. Each work is framed with brief editorial and author descriptions, and tagged with descriptive keywords. The CD-ROM of the _Collection_ runs on both Macintosh and Windows platforms and is published in a case appropriate for library processing, marking, and distribution. Free copies of the CD-ROM can be requested from The Electronic Literature Organization.

The _Collection_ will also be included with N. Katherine Hayles' forthcoming book, _Electronic Literature: Teaching, Interpreting, Playing_ (Notre Dame University Press, 2007).The Electronic Literature Organization (ELO) is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization established in 1999 to promote and facilitate the writing, publishing, and reading of electronic literature. Since its formation, the Electronic Literature Organization has worked to assist writers and publishers in bringing their literary works to a wider, global readership and to provide them with the infrastructure necessary to reach each other. The Electronic Literature Organization is a national organization based at the Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities (MITH).