Back in October, we introduced the MITH/UM Libraries Born Digital Working Group (BDWG) with a post about[ processing the Bill Bly Collection](http://mith.umd.edu/we-descended-processing-the-bill-bly-collection-with-the-umd-born-digital-working-group/). Since then we’ve firmed up our goals ("start collecting/working with diverse born digital materials in the libraries" being a bit nebulous and… huge) and divided ourselves into sub-groups to conquer them. Goals and groups decided upon, we're going to try to give bi-weekly updates on our work, cross-posted to the MITH and [Special Collections](http://hornbakelibrary.wordpress.com/) blogs. We'll be cycling through the groups to ensure every area is covered; those areas are: tools, policies/procedures, metadata, and administration.

**Tools** Originally called "Technology/BitCurator/hardware/software/tools," this subgroup is dedicated to pre-processing work--everything that happens before an acquisition is deposited in the digital repository. The Tools group is led by Jennie Levine Knies and includes Amanda Visconti, Eric Cartier, Matt Kirschenbaum, Porter Olsen and Rachel Donahue.

**Policy/Procedures** Dedicated to developing the many guidelines necessary to implement new digital workflows in the libraries. The Policy/Procedures group is led by Joanne Archer and includes Caitlin Wells, Daniel Mack, Rachel Donahue, Robin Pike, and Trevor Muñoz.

**Metadata** Dedicated to data about data. Specifically, this group will look at everything that’s needed to create a properly-described submission information package (SIP). The Metadata Group is led by Joshua Westgard and includes Eric Cartier,Jennie Levine Knies, and Rachel Donahue.

**Administration** Dedicated to providing the high-level support needed by change agents everywhere. Administration was originally lumped in with Policy/Procedures, but we broke it out to keep things specific and manageable. The Administration group is led by Trevor Muñoz and includes Daniel Mack, Jennie Levine Kniees, Joanne Archer, Matthew Kirschenbaum, and Rachel Donahue.

As you read our posts in the future, bear in mind that we're essentially starting from scratch. We're unlikely to have anything amazingly groundbreaking to share, but we hope that being transparent about our work might help other organizations undergoing similar changes.